# Comparative Study and Prediction of Dow Jones Industrial Average & S&P 500
 
## Summary:

Stock Indices are important indicators of the financial market performances as they aggregate the price movements of the most prominent companies with the highest market capitalizations. They are the proxy metrics of economic prosperity and informs the corporate and individual investors on decisions in asset and portfolio management. This project aims to model the movement of the monthly S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) by conducting univariate modeling against their past time series data between 1992 and 2020 (inclusive), as well as investigate the effect of macro-economic variables through multivariate analysis of DJIA. Our team has developed 7 univariate models and 5 multivariate models to predict the stock indices, including the conventional time series models (ARIMA, GARCH, VAR, etc.) and new-found deep learning models (LSTM, Transformers). We extracted our indices data from Bloomberg, performed data cleaning and integration with macro-economic factors and exploratory data analysis in terms of stationarity and cross-correlation. We trained most of our models mostly on original time series and some in differenced time series due to the model assumption. Based on the goodness of fit metrics from residual analysis, and prediction evaluation metrics, we compared different model’s performance, found that (1) multivariate model does not necessary outperform univariate model; (2) ARMA-GARCH and eGARCH have the best predictive power with less-than-one Precision Error (PM) despite the limitation in short-run flat predictions and those from ARIMA/SARIMA follows the movement and keep up with the changes ; and (3) Prophet and LSTM might be particularly good in dealing with predicting time series with shocks.


## Conclusions:
Investing in the market is very rewarding as well as risky. While economic crisis, pandemic and major events saw huge fluctuations in the market, there are some trends and fluctuations that can be captured to monetize. Forecasts of the market performance can help mitigate some of those risks by actively preparing for the changes and it can also generate capital through investments.
From our project, we see that traditional univariate analysis is sufficient and provides comparable if not better results than multivariate models. ARIMA model seems to generate satisfactory results in terms of both prediction accuracy and movement of forecasts. ARMA-GARCH and eGARCH have low PM however provide flat forecasts. The multivariate model VAR did not offer much information on the relationship between the macro-economic variables with only Balance of trade, granger-causing DJIA. Also, VAR is only able to look at their short-term effects (from orders less than 3). Modelling time series with these exogenous factors in ARIMAX, increases the model complexity and adds noise to the series. This was observed during the pandemic period prediction when several of the macro-economic variables became volatile. Hence, from traditional time series, ARIMA/SARIMA follows the movement and keeps up with the changes, which is sufficient to model our data.
Also, deep learning models, including LSTM and transformers, are backbox models where the hidden computation inside the models is not revealed or is too high-dimensional for a human to extract information. Despite the near-perfect prediction accuracy of LSTM, we cannot dissect the model to pinpoint the most important lag or the most important exogenous variables. By the same token, we cannot find out the reasons why Transformer predicts so poorly for our time series data. Therefore, deep learning models might be helpful to forecast long-term or predict the short-term movements of the indices, but it is not useful if we are undergoing a descriptive study of stock indices movement.
From this project, we have explored the art of modelling and forecasting the market indices of the S&P 500 and DJIA. We compared our model results to economic theory and tried to make sense of our results. We also explored new models like Prophet and Deep Learning architectures for time series and understood their advantages and disadvantages.
